The `histplot2d()` and `plot()` helper functions in `detect.py` (see below) are the simplest way to get some good-looking output. They leverage the other classes below to bin data, construct axes, and plot to the screen.

### Plot class (`plot.py`)
You will need to instantiate a Plot object, either directly through the class constructor, or via a helper function (e.g. in detect.py).
The data to be plotted must be provided. Rendering options (color map, characters to use, the data range, the Axes) may be optionally specified.  You will typically want to use the `.show()` method to print to the screen, but the `as_strings()` method may be useful if you need to further modify the output.

### Axis class (`axis.py`)
Providing an Axis object for your X and Y axes lets you specify the range of each axis, whether tick marks and labels should correspond to the bins themselves or the bin edges, and some axis rendering details. You may provide a set of labels to be used on the axis, or have them be autogenerated for you.

### Colors
#### Truecolor / RGB/ 24-bit color
Several 24-bit color maps are provided in `truecolor.py`, for use with terminals that support it. If you want to specify your own 24-bit color map, the included `colormap24b()` function is a straightforward way to interpolate between provided colors to produce a color map. Interpolation is done in L*a*b* color space to preserve brightness and avoid the "muddy" colors seen when interpolating directly in RGB.

#### 256-color / 16-color
Non-truecolor "ANSI" color maps are provided in `ansi.py`, for both 256-color-capable terminals as well as those with only 16-color minimal color support.

#### ASCII-art
For terminals that don't support colors, or for that old-school look, `ascii_art.py` has some "color maps" using just character density.

### Binning
`binning.py` provides utility functions to bin a list of (X,Y) values into a dataset suitable for plotting with the `Plot` class.
`histogram2d()` is similar to Matplotlib's histogram2d: you can specify the number of bins, or the bin edges.
`bin_with_size()` is similar, but takes the bin size(s) as arguments rather than the number of bins.

### Terminal Capability Detection
`detect.py` has utility routines to try to detect the current terminal's capabilities. These routines are leveraged in several helper functions:
- `pick_colormap()` will pick between supplied colormaps based on the terminal's capabilities
- `plot()` is a wrapper for the `Plot` class constructor that uses `pick_colormap()` to pick the appropriate colormap.
- `histplot2d()` is a wrapper for `binning.histogram2d` together with a call to `plot()`

The helpers provide a simple mechanism to try to use the nicest colors supported by the current terminal. Here, pick between Truecolor grayscale (256 different possible grays), a 256-color grayscale (26 possible grays), or ASCII-art:
```
from densitty.detect import GRAYSCALE, plot

...

plot(my_data, colors=GRAYSCALE, x_axis=my_x_axis, y_axis=my_y_axis)
```
